Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour draws on apace.
Four happy days bring in another moon,
but oh, methinks, how slow this old moon wanes.
She lingers my desires like to a step-dame or a dowager
long withering out a young man's revenue.
Four days will quickly steep themselves in night.
Four nights will quickly dream away the time.
Then the moon, like to a silver bow new bent in heaven,
shall behold the night of our solemnities.
Go, Philostrate, stir up the Athenian youth to merriments.
Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth.
Turn melancholy forth to funerals.
The pale companion is not for our pomp.
Hippolyta, I wooed thee with my sword
and won thy love doing the injuries.
But I will wed thee in another key,
with pomp, with triumph, and with revelling.
Happy be Theseus, our renowned Duke.
Thanks, good Egeus.
What's the news with thee?
Full of vexation come I
with complaint against my child, my daughter Hermia.
My noble lord, this man, Demetrius, hath my consent to marry her.
And, my gracious Duke, this man, Lysander,
hath bewitched the bosom of my child.
Thou, thou, Lysander, thou has given her rhymes
and interchanged love tokens with my child.
Thou hast by moonlight at her window
sung with feigning voice verses of feigning love
and stolen the impression of her fantasy.
With cunning hath thou filched my daughter's heart,
turned her obedience, which is due to me,
to stubborn harshness.
And, my gracious Duke, be it so she will not here before your grace
consent to marry with Demetrius,
I beg the ancient privilege of Athens.
As she is mine, I may dispose of her,
which shall be either to this gentleman or to her death,
according to our law immediately provided in that case.
What says thou, Hermia?
Be advised, fair maid: To you, your father should be as a god,
one that composed your beauties,
yea, and one to whom you are but as a form in wax
by him imprinted and within his power
to leave the figure or disfigure it.
Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.
So is Lysander.
In himself, he is.
But in this kind, wanting your father's voice,
the other must be held to be the worthier.
I would my father looked but with my eyes.
Rather, your eyes must with his judgment look.
I do entreat your grace to pardon me.
I know not by what power I am made bold,
nor how it may concern my modesty
in such a presence here to plead my thoughts,
but I beseech your grace that I may know
the worst that may befall me in this case
if I refuse to wed Demetrius.
Either to die the death
or to abjure forever the society of men.
Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires,
know of your youth, examine well your blood,
whether, if you yield not to your father's choice,
you can endure the livery of a nun,
for aye to be in shady cloister mewed,
to live a barren sister all your life,
chanting faint hymns to the cold, fruitless moon.
Thrice-blessed they that master so their blood,
to undergo such maiden pilgrimage,
but earthlier happy is the rose distilled
than that which withering on the virgin thorn grows,
lives, and dies in single blessedness.
So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord.
Ere I will yield my virgin patent up unto his lordship,
whose unwished yoke my soul consents not to give sovereignty.
Take time to pause, and, by the next new moon--
the sealing-day betwixt my love and me
for everlasting bond of fellowship--
upon that day, either prepare to die
for disobedience to your father's will
or else to wed Demetrius, as he would,
or on Diana's altar to protest
for aye austerity and single life.
Relent, sweet Hermia.
And, Lysander, yield thy crazed title to my certain right.
You have her father's love, Demetrius.
Let me have Hermia's.
Do you marry him?
Scornful Lysander, true, he hath my love.
And what is mine my love shall render him.
And she is mine, and all my right of her
I do estate unto Demetrius.
I am, my lord, as well derived as he,
as well possessed.
My love is more than his.
My fortunes every way as fairly ranked,
if not with vantage, as Demetrius'.
And, which is more than all these boasts can be,
I am beloved of beauteous Hermia.
Why should not I then prosecute my right?
Demetrius, I'll avouch it to his head,
made love to Nedar's daughter, Helena,
and won her soul.
And she, sweet lady, dotes, devoutly dotes,
dotes in idolatry, upon this spotted and inconstant man.
I must confess that I have heard as much,
and with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof,
but, being over-full of self-affairs,
my mind did lose it.
But, Demetrius, come.
And come, Egeus, you shall go with me.
I have some private schooling for you both.
For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself
to fit your fancies to your father's will,
or else the law of Athens yields you up--
which by no means we may extenuate--
to death or to a vow of single life.
How now, my love?
Why is your cheek so pale?
How chance the roses there do fade so fast?
Belike for want of rain, which I could well beteem them
from the tempest of my eyes.
Ay me.
For aught that I could ever read,
could ever hear by tale or history,
the course of true love never did run smooth.
But, either it was different in blood--
Oh cross,
too high to be enthralled too low.
Or else misgraffed in respect of years.
Oh, spite.
Too old to be engaged to young.
Or else it stood upon the choice of friends.
Oh, hell.
To choose love by another's eyes.
Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,
war, death, or sickness did lay siege to it,
making it momentary as a sound,
swift as a shadow, short as any dream,
brief as the lightning in the collied night.
Ere a man hath power to say "Behold,"
the jaws of darkness do devour it up,
So quick bright things come to confusion.
If then true lovers have been ever crossed,
it stands as an edict in destiny.
let us teach our trial patience,
because it is a customary cross
as due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,
wishes and tears, poor fancy's followers.
A good persuasion.
Therefore, hear me, Hermia.
I have a widow aunt, a dowager of great revenue,
and she hath no child.
From Athens is her house remote seven leagues.
And she respects me as her only son.
There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee,
And to that place the sharp Athenian law cannot pursue us.
If thou lovest me then,
steal forth thy father's house tomorrow night,
and in the wood, a league without the town,
where I did meet thee once with Helena
to do observance to a morn of May,
there will I stay for thee.
My good Lysander.
I swear to thee, by Cupid's strongest bow,
by his best arrow with the golden head,
by the simplicity of Venus' doves,
by that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,
and by that fire which burned the Carthage queen,
when the false Troyan under sail was seen,
by all the vows that ever men have broke,
in number more than ever woman spoke.
At that same place thou hast appointed me,
tomorrow truly will I meet with thee.
God speed, fair Helena.
Call you me fair?
That fair again unsay.
Demetrius loves your fair.
Oh, happy fair.
Your eyes are lodestars,
and your tongue's sweet air more tunable
than lark to shepherd's ear when wheat is green,
when hawthorn buds appear.
Sickness is catching.
Oh, were favour so,
yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go.
My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye,
my tongue should catch your tongue's sweet melody.
Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated,
the rest I'd give to be to you translated.
Oh, teach me how you look
and with what art you sway the motion of Demetrius' heart.
I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.
Oh that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill.
I give him curses, yet he gives me love.
Oh, that my prayers could such affection move.
The more I hate, the more he follows me.
The more I love, the more he hateth me.
His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.
None but your beauty.
Oh, would that fault were mine.
Take comfort. He no more shall see my face.
Lysander and myself shall fly this place.
Before the time I did Lysander see,
seemed Athens as a paradise to me.
Oh, then, what graces in my love do dwell
that he hath turned a heaven unto a hell.
Helen, to you our minds we will unfold.
Tomorrow night, when Phoebe doth behold
her silver visage in the watery glass,
decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass,
a time that lovers' flights doth still conceal,
through Athens' gates we have devised to steal.
And in that wood,
where often you and I upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie,
emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,
there my Lysander and myself shall meet
and thence from Athens turn away our eyes
to seek new friends and stranger companies.
Farewell, sweet playfellow.
Pray thou for us.
And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius.
How happy some o'er other some can be.
Through Athens, I am thought as fair as she.
But what of that?
Demetrius thinks not so.
He will not know what all but he do know.
And as he errs, doting on Hermia's eyes,
so I, admiring of his qualities.
Things base and vile, holding no quantity
love can transpose to form and dignity.
Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind,
and therefore is winged Cupid painted blind.
Nor hath love's mind of any judgment taste.
Wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste.
And therefore is love said to be a child,
because in choice, he is so oft beguiled.
As waggish boys in game themselves forswear,
so the boy Love is perjured everywhere.
For ere Demetrius looked on Hermia's eyne,
he hailed down oaths that he was only mine.
And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,
so he dissolved, and showers of oaths did melt.
I will go tell him of fair Hermia's flight,
then to the wood will he tomorrow night pursue her.
And for this intelligence if I have thanks,
it is a dear expense.
But herein mean I to enrich my pain,
to have his sight thither and back again.
Is all our company here?
You would best to call them generally,
man by man, according to the script.
Here is the scroll of every man's name
which is thought fit, through all Athens,
to play in our interlude before the duke and the duchess
on his wedding day at night.
First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats on,
then read the names of the actors and so grow to a point.
Marry, our play is the most lamentable comedy
and most cruel death of Pyramus and Thisbe.
A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a merry.
Now, good Peter Quince, call forth your actors by the scroll.
Masters, spread yourselves.
Answer as I call you.
Nick Bottom, the weaver.
Ready.
Name what part I am for and proceed.
You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.
What is Pyramus, a lover, or a tyrant?
A lover that kills himself most gallant for love.
That will ask some tears in the true performing of it.
If I do it, let the audience look to their eyes.
I will move storms.
I will condole in some measure.
To the rest.
Yet my chief humour is for a tyrant.
I could play Ercles rarely, or a part to tear a cat in,
to make all split.
The raging rocks and shivering shocks
shall break the locks of prison gates.
And Phibbus' car shall shine from far
and make and mar the foolish fates.
This was lofty.
Now name the rest of the players.
This is Ercles' vein, a tyrant's vein.
A lover is more condoling.
Francis Flute, the bellows-maker.
Here, Peter Quince.
Flute, you must take Thisbe on you.
What is Thisbe, a wandering knight?
It is the lady that Pyramus must love.
Nay, faith, let not me play a woman.
I have a beard coming.
That's all one.
You shall play it in a mask.
And you may speak as small as you will.
And I may hide my face.
Let me play Thisbe too.
I'll speak in a monstrous little voice.
"Thisne, Thisne."
"Ah, Pyramus, my lover dear."
"Thy Thisbe dear, and lady dear."
No, no, no, you must play Pyramus,
and, Flute, you Thisbe.
Well, proceed.
Robin Starveling, the tailor.
Here, Peter Quince.
Robin Starveling, you must play...
Thisbe's mother.
Tom Snout, the tinker.
Here, Peter Quince.
You, Pyramus' father.
and myself, Thisbe's father.
Oh, and Snug the joiner, you, the lion's part.
And, I hope, here is a play fitted.
Have you the lion's part written?
Pray you, if it be, give it me, for I am slow of study.
You may do it extempore, for it's nothing but roaring.
Let me play the lion too.
I will roar that it will do any man good to hear me.
I will roar that it will make the duke say,
"Let him roar again. Let him roar again!"
And you should do it too terribly,
you would fright the duchess and the ladies that they would shriek.
And that were enough to hang us all.
That would hang us, every mother's son.
I grant you, friends,
if you should fright the ladies out of their wits,
they would have no more discretion but to hang us,
but I will aggravate my voice so that I will roar you
as gently as any sucking dove.
I will roar you an 'twere any nightingale.
You can play no part but Pyramus,
for Pyramus is a sweet-faced man,
a proper man, as one shall see in a summer's day,
a most lovely gentleman-like man.
Therefore you must needs play Pyramus.
Well, I will undertake it.
Masters, here are your parts.
And I am to entreat you, request you, and desire you
to con them by tomorrow night
and meet me in the palace wood, a mile without the town, by moonlight.
There will we rehearse,
for if we meet in the city, we will be dogged with company,
and our devices known.
In the meantime, I will draw a bill of properties,
such as our play wants.
I pray you, fail me not.
We will meet,
and there we may rehearse most obscenely and courageously.
Take pains; Be perfect.
Adieu.
Hold or cut bow-strings.